okay so we are here today
on
19th of july hottest day in the history
of the world ever
i thought it would be um
a good opportunity to talk about energy
prices and the energy price crisis
because um
it's important we need to know how to
fix it but also i think it's a good
opportunity to
introduce people with some ideas that
they can use to help understand and
evaluate what's happening in the economy
and also talk a little bit about
the way the media oversimplifies these
ideas in a way which is often unhelpful
and confusing
okay so
we all know energy prices have become
really really high
it's causing the consequence that a lot
of people in many cases
will not be able to heat their homes in
this winter which is
a very very serious problem like
literally people will die people's lives
will become very uncomfortable
um and how do we fix it
okay so the first thing which people
need to understand is that
not everyone uses the same amount of
energy
um and the number one thing which
affects how much energy you use is how
rich you are
so um
very rich people they use a lot of
energy you know if you think of like
super super rich people they literally
fly around in private jets you know this
is
you know this unbelievably high energy
consumption uh but they'll have very big
houses which they'll tend to
heat in the winter and cool in the
summer and then they'll have they maybe
will own a lot of cars and they'll use
private cars and they'll drive them a
lot and maybe have big cars
they'll have big parties there's loads
and loads of ways in which very wealthy
people use a lot of energy right
that's number one point to make number
two point is
um
there's kind of
two
separate sort of theories bouncing
around about what the cause of the
inflation is um
and this is with regards to both energy
and inflation in general so people watch
the channel a lot will know that i've
been talking about inflation it's going
to happen for basically since the
beginning of the channel essentially the
very first video on the channel was like
we're printing a lot of money it's going
to the rich after code but it's going to
cause inflation and i think this is a
big part of the cause of all the
inflation we're seeing
but that's not the main
narrative in the mainstream media which
is that the inflation uh in general but
also like specifically with regards to
ukraine is caused primarily by uh
specifically because with regards to
energy it's caused specifically by the
war in ukraine right the war in ukraine
is causing that inflation and um yeah i
think it's really if you think about it
obvious like as a whole it should be
obvious that that is not the sole cause
for the inflation because things like
for example
london housing and the london rental
market are blowing up right like
massively prices going through the roof
that's obviously not to do with the war
in ukraine but if you talk specifically
about energy
you know russia not releasing gas
reserves to europe is probably a big
part of it right so there's two things
going on at the same time which is
number one the rich were given an
absolutely ton of money during covid
and the obvious consequence of that is
inflation but number two in some
specific markets and energy is the most
obvious one of those there are supply
side issues where for example russia is
not selling the energy and that's making
energy more expensive so two things are
happening at once right which is the
rich are way richer so they can pay more
money
and
energy in particular the supply the
amount of energy that we actually have
access to has been restricted right
um
so this is really problematic right
because
we already know that rich people consume
a lot of energy right
and then we have a situation where the
rich have a ton of money and the country
as a whole has not much energy right so
if you know that there's going to be an
energy shortage in the uk
this is a global problem but we're
talking about the uk
what would be the ideal way to fix it
the ideal solution well you know most
people don't use like much more energy
than they need right you know maybe they
need to drive to work you know but most
obviously they need to heat their homes
you know and most people don't use that
much more energy than that you know
especially poorer people they'll be like
very you know i know growing up my dad
was really on it like he doesn't want to
use
any extra energy right because he's
trying to save money right so most
people are just using the energy they
need maybe like a little bit extra in
some cases right and then the rich are
literally flying around in private jets
right so if you're in a situation where
suddenly
you don't have enough energy what do you
want what's what should you do as a so
what does a sensible country do well a
sensible country turns around to the
guys flying around in private jets and
says
maybe you should stop flying around in
private jets
but
what we have done is given the rich
enormous pile of money so you know
if the rich have just been given
hundreds of millions of pounds it's
hundreds of billions of pounds in the
case of this country
are they going to reduce their energy
consumption in response to even a
doubling in price that's not their
energy bills are nothing to them
it's meaningless it's a tiny tiny
fraction of their incomes right
so
we've created a situation where the
thing which there's not enough energy
the obvious sensible thing we should do
which is encourage the rich or perhaps
even force the rich to use less energy
is the exact opposite of what we've done
what we've done is encourage the rich to
use more energy by giving them a ton of
money so what that means is
the people who have to respond to the
energy shortage are the people who don't
have money which is the poor
and and that is literally not heating
your homes right so the way we're
dealing with it
from like a perspective of just like do
you want people in the country to have
like good quality livable lives it's
ridiculous right we've dealt with it in
such a way that we encouraging the rich
to fly their private jets more because
we give them a ton of money and
encouraging the poor to like freeze
their families in the winter
so exact opposite what we should be
doing right
it's it's ridiculous right and and then
now let's look at what is like the most
commonly proposed solution right the
most commonly proposed solution is to to
do something to directly reduce the cost
of energy right and you can see the
logic in that right it's like the cost
the price of energy has gone up so we
need to bring the price of energy down
so what can you bring the price of
energy down and that is like
totally you can see the logic in it but
it's actually not a great idea and i'll
explain why okay so
there's this concept in economics some
people will have heard of it some people
would have not heard of it called a
universal basic income
and universal basic income is basically
the idea that the government should give
everyone a certain amount of money every
month every year and everyone should get
it it should be like totally
unconditional everybody should get that
money and you know the idea behind it is
you know this gives everyone the basic
ability to live like a basic quality of
life right
and we'll probably discuss in this in
more detail on another video but the
reason i want to bring up at this point
is a universal basic income gives
everybody in the country the same amount
of money okay
and it's an interesting thing
when the government starts giving out
money it's interesting to compare it to
your universal basic income because then
we can see who's winning who's losing
you know if everybody gets the same then
it's kind of equal right so we can say
is this policy better or worse than a
universal basic income people call it
ubi in terms of inequality distribution
so if the policy gives more to the rich
it's worse than ebi
from
the perspective of inequality and if
a policy gives more to the poor or to
ordinary people unless they're rich is
better than a ubi that making sense to
you
so if we look at a policy which reduces
energy prices
is that better or worse than ebi well we
know rich people use more energy so if
we bring energy prices down you benefit
exactly proportionally to how much
energy you use right like if you use
if you normally spend
1 000 pounds of energy a year and we
bring the energy price down 10 you save
100 pounds if you're super rich and
you've got 10 private jets and you
normally spend 100 grand on energy
then you're going to save
10 grand right so
bringing energy prices down
actually helps the rich much more than
the poor in terms of the actual amount
of money they save right
so say we we bring in a ubi that's going
to cost
so we bring in a we reduce energy bills
in such that it cost the government 20
billion pounds
well that money will go more to the rich
than what to the poor and you'd actually
give the people who needed the money
more
more money if you just gave them a flat
amount of money but also
if you reduce energy bills you encourage
people
to use more energy
because you make energy cheaper in a
situation where there's not enough
energy to go around so actually like
this policy which seems initially like
the most sensible policy which is energy
bills have gone up let's bring energy
bills down is actually
really bad from a distributional
perspective it's worse than just giving
out money
and also really bad from a saving energy
perspective it's encouraging people to
use more energy
so it's
it's a horrible policy it seems like a
good policy but it's a horrible policy
right and i think what you actually want
from a policy if you know that the rich
are getting really richer and the poor
are really struggling and we don't have
enough energy what you want from a
policy is a policy that discourages
usage of energy from everyone but
particularly from the rich because they
are the people who are using the most
wasteful energy
and one that distributes
income away from the rich
because they're making a fortune when
people are struggling and towards the
people that need it right so what you
actually want to do the perfect policy
is actually really the exact opposite
policy what we're doing right what you
want to do is you want to put a tax on
energy consumption
and then you want to use that money
to support the poor
because if what that would do is bring
energy price up
and that will discourage energy usage
from everyone which is good but it will
also funnel money away from the high
energy users which is the rich
to the low energy users which is
ordinary people and poor families which
means that even though their energy bill
has gone up they will get more
from this tax
because we know that they use less than
the average amount of energy right
and um
it's interesting because it's
counterintuitive right like ordinary
people be like you need to bring that
you need to bring the bills they need to
bring the bills down but what all the
new people need is not necessarily
cheaper energy bills it's more money
they need more money
you know and then
some poor people might be able to
economize on their energy usage if they
had more if they had more money in other
ways you know what i mean
and then that would be good for society
as a whole but the policy what we have
at the moment
is actively funneling money to the rich
and encouraging them to use more energy
at the time when the rich have a ton of
money
the poor are really struggling and we're
using too much energy
so
i think this is sort of a good example
of how
the
the economics media which i spoke about
in other videos um
very simplistic approach to things
and i think the key thing is
never takes a distributional approach
and i think this idea which i've
introduced here in this video compare it
to a ubi compared to universal basic
income is
a really interesting way to really
assess whether a policy is good or not
because if a policy benefits the rich
more than the poor
then why not just give money equally
you'd be better and it's easier
you know it's easier it's cheaper it's
direct money into my bank account you
know what i mean like would you rather
as an a poor family would you rather
have your energy bills reduced in a way
that saves you
200 pounds a year or would you rather
have 1 000 pounds in your bank account
every year
you see what i'm saying and this is what
if we actually start looking at policies
from a distributional perspective and
saying look who are we really helping
here
then we will bring policies which
actually help ordinary families and you
know
we have this problem structural problem
in our politics in our media which is
increasingly our politics is dominated
by very very very wealthy people
our media is owned and dominated by very
very very wealthy people
so then they behind the scenes are
promoting policies that help them and
they're telling you that it's good for
you
and the way which you can defend
yourself from that is this simple trick
which is look at the policy is a better
than ubi and it's it's also relevant
with regards to
the conservative leadership elections
right because all of these guys are
promising tax cuts tax cuts tax cuts
right and this is in a context where
they have
cut income tax and raised national
insurance which is a really interesting
like
like a trick to do because people don't
like income tax but people don't
understand national insurance and when
you understand that income tax is paid
on all income and national trade is paid
only on worked income you can see that
what they've done is they've cut taxes
on billionaires and raised taxes on you
because you your money all comes from
your working and their money comes from
wealth right and if you were to just say
okay well
would it be better just to give money
out equally then you'll see okay all of
these policies are continually designed
to funnel money to the rich
so whenever whenever they suggest the
policies that they're suggesting now
which is cut taxes cut taxes well who
who benefits most from cutting taxes
generally richer people
so look at their policies and say look
are these policies designed to benefit
ordinary families or are they designed
to benefit the rich
and
understand that they have incentives to
try and convince you
that policies which are good for the
rich are actually good for you
so compare it to a basic simple policy
and say who benefits the most
and in this case when it comes to energy
prices cutting energy prices directly
actually benefits the rich most whereas
there are other alternative options such
as taxes on energy where the money is
used given directly back to ordinary
families that will benefit you more
that will transfer money from the rich
to the poor
and to ordinary families
and
will actually reduce energy consumption
and and this is
not a complicated policy but
unfortunately you know
we have a media which is in very cases
very many cases not great quality and
it's not giving you good information so
um
so yeah i think that's that's that's the
message i want to leave is um i think
this is like one quick one quick trick
to analyze
a policy suggestion who benefits the
most in terms of cash who benefits the
most in terms of cash is it you is it
your family is it ordinary families in
order no financial situations or is it
the rich and directly reducing energy
bills benefits to rich the most and
cutting taxes benefits the rich the most
whereas putting taxes on energy
consumption and giving that money back
to everyone equally
would benefit you would benefit ordinary
families not only family would benefit
more from you so um
yeah
hopefully this gives people a way to
sort of understand better how we can fix
our problems and i think the key
takeaway message is just whenever you
hear any policy suggested by government
any government but perhaps especially
this conservative government which has
a lot of very very wealthy people in it
look at it explicitly
from the perspective of distribution
who wins the most is it the rich or is
it ordinary families and if it's the
rich ask yourself why is that the policy
i've chosen
okay that's it um
i hope everyone enjoyed the heatwave
this will probably come out a few weeks
after it
will go inside because i'm sweating my
ass off
so it's intentionally designed national
insurance so that very rich people pay a
very low percent
there is one other thing they can do
with that mass amount of income
they can buy your mom's house
[Music]
you